# Abdul's Wiki — Darul Ulum Montreal Platform

> Living documentation. Update this file whenever architecture or major features change.

---

## What This App Is

**Darul Ulum Montreal** is a web-based management platform for an Islamic Quran school (madrassah) in Montreal. It serves three distinct user types: **Admins**, **Teachers**, and **Parents**.

The core purpose: track every student's Quran memorization journey, monitor attendance, enable teacher-parent communication, and give admins full visibility into school performance.

**Live URL:** https://app.daralulummontreal.com/

---

## Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology |
|---|---|
| Frontend | React 18 + Vite + TypeScript |
| UI Components | shadcn/ui + Radix UI primitives |
| Styling | TailwindCSS 3.4 |
| State / Data | TanStack React Query 5 |
| Forms | React Hook Form + Zod |
| Routing | React Router 6 |
| Charts | Recharts |
| Animation | Framer Motion |
| Backend | Supabase (Postgres + Auth + Storage + Edge Functions) |
| Email | Resend API (via Supabase Edge Functions) |
| Calendar | FullCalendar |

---

## User Roles

### Admin
- Full access to everything
- Can proxy into any teacher or parent account ("View As") — amber banner shows during proxy, Exit button restores admin view; eye icon on Teachers page and Parent Accounts page
- Views live analytics dashboard (KPIs, at-risk students, alerts)
- Manages teacher accounts, parent accounts, student roster
- Can import students via CSV bulk upload
- Views activity feed
- Can manually invoke email notifications
- Routes to `/dashboard` → teacher portal view with admin flag

### Teacher
- Logs student Quran progress (Dhor Book: surah, juz, ayat, quality, notes)
- Takes attendance (bulk, per class/session)
- Views at-risk students and performance analytics
- Sends messages to parents (with email notification via Resend)
- Creates and grades assignments
- Views their class schedule
- Routes to `/dashboard` → teacher portal

### Parent
- Views child's Quran progress, attendance history
- Views and filters assignments/submissions
- Messages the teacher (with email notification)
- If linked to multiple children, uses child selector
- Routes to `/parent`

---

## Page Map

### Shared
- `/auth` — Login/signup
- `/reset-password` — Password reset

### Admin Sub-pages (under `/admin`)
- `/admin/parent-accounts` — Manage parent accounts
- `/admin/bulk-student-import` — CSV student import
- `/admin/teacher-schedules` — View teacher schedules
- `/admin/setup` — First-time setup wizard
- `/admin/roles` — Manual role assignment

### Main App (protected, under `DashboardLayout`)
- `/dashboard` — Role-based hub (Teacher Portal or Admin Portal)
- `/parent` — Parent dashboard
- `/parent/progress` — Child's Quran progress
- `/parent/academics` — Assignments with status filtering
- `/parent/attendance` — Attendance history
- `/parent/messages` — Teacher messaging
- `/students` — Student roster
- `/students/:id` — Individual student profile
- `/teachers` — Teacher roster
- `/classes` — Class management
- `/progress-book` — Dhor book entry (teacher)
- `/attendance` — Bulk attendance form (teacher)
- `/messages` — Teacher messaging
- `/schedule` — Teacher schedule
- `/teacher-accounts` — Manage teacher accounts (admin)
- `/add-parent` — Link parent to student (teacher)
- `/settings` — System settings
- `/preferences` — User preferences
- `/activity` — Activity feed (admin)
- `/calendar` — School calendar (events, holidays, PD days) — all roles

### Dev-only (gated)
- `/dev/seeder`, `/dev/create-demo`, `/dev/create-teacher-profile`, etc.

---

## Data Architecture

### Key Supabase Tables
| Table | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `profiles` | User profiles (all roles) — name, role, email, subject |
| `students` | Student records — name, status, class_ids, madrassah_id |
| `classes` | Class records — name, teacher_ids, current_students |
| `progress` | Quran progress entries — surah, juz, ayat, quality, notes |
| `attendance` | Attendance records — date, status, session, reason |
| `teacher_assignments` | Assignments — title, due_date, status, student_ids |
| `messages` | In-app messages — sender_id, recipient_id, message, read |
| `parents` | Parent records — student_ids link |
| `parent_children` | Parent→student linkage (legacy/fallback) |
| `notifications` | In-app notification queue |
| `analytics_metrics` | Pre-aggregated analytics data |

### Row Level Security
All tables have RLS policies. Teachers see only their students. Parents see only their children's data. Admins have full access.

---

## Email System

All emails go through **Resend** via Supabase Edge Functions:

| Function | When it fires |
|---|---|
| `send-teacher-message` | Teacher or parent sends an in-app message |
| `attendance-absence-email` | Student marked absent (runs every 5 min via pg_cron) |
| `daily-progress-email` | Daily summary of student progress to parents |
| `send-parent-welcome-emails` | When a parent account is created |
| `admin-send-email` | Admin manual email blast |
| `send-late-arrival-alert` | When a student is marked late (POST `{ student_id, date, time }`) |
| `send-assignment-notification` | When a new assignment is created — notifies linked parents (POST `{ assignment_id, type }`) |

Required env secrets: `RESEND_API_KEY`, `RESEND_FROM_EMAIL`, `APP_URL`, `LOGO_URL`

---

## Component Architecture

```
src/
├── pages/               # Top-level route components
│   ├── admin/           # Admin-specific pages
│   ├── dev/             # Dev-only tools (gated)
│   └── *.tsx            # Auth, Dashboard, Parent, Teacher pages
├── components/
│   ├── layouts/         # DashboardLayout, Sidebar, SidebarNav, SidebarUser
│   ├── analytics/       # EmptyState (shared empty state component)
│   ├── attendance/      # Attendance form, table, watchlist, heatmap components
│   ├── dhor-book/       # Quran progress recording (DhorBook, ClassroomRecords, etc.)
│   ├── teacher-portal/  # Full teacher dashboard (tabs, students, assignments, grading)
│   ├── onboarding/      # OnboardingModal (first login), DailyPromptModal (once/day)
│   ├── parent/          # ChildSelector, ParentMessages
│   ├── dashboard/       # DashboardStats, StatsCard, WeeklySchedule
│   ├── shared/          # FloatingDailyEmailButton, PageHelpBanner
│   ├── admin/           # Admin messaging, reports, settings, account management
│   ├── students/        # Student list, dialog, form
│   ├── teachers/        # Teacher list, dialog
│   ├── classes/         # Class management
│   └── ui/              # shadcn/ui wrapper components
├── hooks/               # Custom React hooks (auth, RBAC, data fetching, analytics)
├── services/analytics/  # KPI calculation, alert engine, aggregation jobs
├── contexts/            # AuthContext, I18nContext
├── types/               # TypeScript interfaces
├── utils/               # Helper functions (Quran math, CSV, role checks)
├── config/              # Navigation definitions
├── i18n/                # Translation strings
├── styles/              # Global CSS (theme, animations, components)
└── integrations/supabase/ # Client setup and generated types
```

---

## Attendance System

The attendance page is the primary monitoring surface. Key features:

- **Roll Call tab** — `AttendanceForm` selects class + date, marks status per student (present, absent, late, sick, excused, early_departure). Cutoff time enforced server-side.
- **Watchlist tab** — queries last 30 days, surfaces students with 2+ absences with consecutive-day streak badge and last-seen date.
- **Heatmap tab** — 30-day grid of school-wide daily attendance rate. Color bands: ≥90% green, 75–89% light green, 60–74% amber, <60% red.
- **Records tab** — `AttendanceTable` shows full attendance log with filters.
- **Multi-day Absence** — `LongTermAbsenceModal` creates one excused record per weekday in a date range.

**At-risk (teacher portal only):**
`useTeacherStudentMetrics` flags students with low attendance rate or no progress in 7+ days. Shown in `DashboardOverview` alert banner.

---

## Navigation Config

`src/config/navigation.ts` defines nav items per role:
- **adminNavItems** — 11 items (Dashboard, Analytics, Students, Teachers, Classes, ProgressBook, Attendance, ParentAccounts, BulkImport, TeacherSchedules, Settings)
- **teacherNavItems** — 8 items (filtered by capability: attendance, progress, assignments)
- **parentNavItems** — 6 items (ParentDashboard, AddParent, Messages, QuranProgress, Academics, Attendance)

---

## I18n

Custom I18n context (not react-i18next). Translation keys in `src/i18n/translations.ts`. Falls back to key string if translation missing. Language stored in localStorage.

---

## Change Log

| Date | Summary | See Also |
|---|---|---|
| 2026-04-27 (s4) | Admin proxy/impersonation feature (ProxyContext, eye button on teachers+parents, amber banner, useRBAC override); nav cleanup (section groups, Profile/Settings moved to user dropdown, trimmed teacher+parent nav) | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 (s3) | Full luxury UI redesign: sidebar pill active state + dark avatar + wordmark; tinted dashboard stat cards (green/red/amber) + 4xl KPI numbers + section header accents; icon page headers on Students/Teachers/Classes; colored avatar circles + icon action buttons in all tables; AdminPageShell gradient button fix | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 (s2) | Bug fix: green banner text now uses inline styles to defeat CSS theme specificity (`.admin-theme`/`.teacher-theme` were overriding `text-white`); all 4 green banner pages fixed | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-27 | 6 features: contact pop-up, CSV export, unexcused warnings, late arrivals alert, school calendar, assignment notifications; `school_events` table migration; 2 new edge functions | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-26 (s2) | Analytics removal; attendance redesign (watchlist + heatmap); DailyPromptModal; Settings toggle | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-26 | 5 DUM Application Feedback features (onboarding, admin dashboard, Health IEP, Staff HRIS, sick status); schedule seed | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-16 | Absence reasons, multi-day modal, student dossier, profile page | handoff.md |
| 2026-04-15 | Initial wiki creation; UI cleanup; debug log removal; real data for DashboardStats, TodayStudents, RecentActivity | handoff.md |
